# Data Description
The following datasets will be used to model correlations between golden eagle (*Aquila chrysaetos*) population trends and occupancy status with landscape scale environmental factors including primary production, drought, fire, and human development in Eastern Oregon. 

The first dataset includes is a spreadsheet of observations from known golden eagle nesting areas and will include all historic surveys (2011-2020) as well as current surveys (2024 - present). The spreadsheet includes nest IDs, nest locations (GPS coordinates), occupancy status (eagle presence), and reproductive outcome (success, # chicks fledged). The historic data was collected by Oregon Department of Fish & Wildlife (ODFW) personnel on paper data sheets and compiled into a CSV spreadsheet. Current data will be collected by field technicians visiting nest sites multiple times per breeding season and entering observations in ESRI Field Maps form. The observations in Field Maps are synced to Arc GIS Online server and will be downloaded and saved as CSV files, appended to historic data, and compiled by year. Golden Eagle Nest Data – 1-2 GB

The second dataset is a collection of GPS data points from 25 individually marked eagles in the study area. This data is collected via MTI GPS/UHF solar-charged backpack transmitters that are placed on captured eagles. The transmitters upload the data to ARGOS satellites, from which location data can be downloaded as a CSV for each transmitter. Data will be processed and combined in R software to model home range parameters of breeding eagles in Oregon. Golden Eagle GPS Data – 2-5 GB

The third dataset is a spreadsheet of remote sensed environmental data collected from publicly available resources including MODIS, TerraClimate, and Landsat. The raster files are pulled from publicly available resources, clipped to the home range of a nesting golden eagle (modeled above) around each nest site, and averaged over the appropriate area and timeframe to result in a numerical value representing primary production (NDVI), drought (PDSI), proportion of landscape burned, and proportion of developed land. This data will be linked to each individual nest ID from the previous dataset. This data will be sourced and processed by utilizing Google Earth Engine before downloading CSV files and compiling data by nest ID and year. Remote Sensed Environmental Data – 1-2 GB


# Roles and Responsibilities
The golden eagle nest, and GPS data is collected and compiled by ODFW and used by the principle investigator and student for analysis. It is the role and responsibility of the department to generate, document, protect, archive, and share the data. This includes any instrumentation and software maintenance needed to collect or preserve data.

Within the scope of the porject anaylsis, it is the responsibility of the PI and the graduate student to implement the DMP and to coordinate roles and responsibilities of outside collaborators and staff.

The graduate student will gather data generated from publicly available remote sensed databases. It is the graduate student’s responsibility to ensure all current and past data is organized and checked for errors. The student will generate metadata for each data source above. The graduate student is responsible for organization, naming, and version control of all files and any products of data analysis. All analysis will be the responsibility of the PI and graduate student.

Software maintenance – The graduate student is responsible for making sure all data collection software and applications, including maintaining Field Maps data collection form, are up to date and available for data collection.

The research is funded by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service through a Pittman-Robertson Act grant and therefore all data, excluding sensitive data, must be shared via publicly available federal databases. All data must also be retained for 2 to 5 years following the completion of the grant.

During the project, original copies of field and remote sensed data will be collected and stored on ESRI and Google Earth Engine cloud systems, respectively. All field (historic and current) and remote sensed data will be collected, compiled, and stored on the graduate student’s local hard drive. GPS location data will be automatically downloaded and stored in departmental database, accessible via shared network drive. All field data from the graduate student’s local hard drive will be manually backed up on departmental shared network drive on a weekly basis. In total the data will be located in three separate places, ESRI/Google cloud systems, local hard drive, and department shared network drive. The GPS location data is automatically downloaded from ARGOS cloud system, which maintains a record of all locations upon request. In total GPS location data will have copies in two locations, ARGOS cloud system and department shared network drive. The department shared network is maintained and backed up by professional staff to ensure no data is lost. 

# Data Standards and Metadata
Due to having three separate datasets that I will be working with for my project, as well as R code and output used in analysis, I will follow a strict naming convention for all files to maintain organization. Files will be named succinctly with what is contained within each CSV or R file (i.e. goea_nestdata, goea_gpsdata, goea_habitatdata, etc.). Any manual version control from downloading data from outside sources will be clearly documented with a date at the end of each file (i.e. goea_gpsdata_20260430, goea_gpsdata_20260501), in addition to a subscript if there are multiple files on the same day (i.e. goea_gpsdata_20260430_a, goea_gpsdata_20260430_b). All data (including R code) and metadata generated for my project will utilize Github for version control, except for those file types described above. File structure within Github will reflect the purposes of each data source; raw data, code/analysis, presentations/output with corresponding README files in each folder to describe what files are contained in each. In addition there will be a overarching README file at the top of the repository to describe what each folder contains.

All metadata associated with tabular data will be generated and documented in separate documents within the Github repository folder associated with the original data source (nest data, GPS data, habitat data). There will be both human (html) and machine readable (XML) files for the metadata files. Metadata generation will follow Ecological Metadata Language (EML) as described in Fegraus et al. (2005), and utilize the R package eml to generate. While not inclusive of all information included in the EML strategy, each data source’s metadata will include: author(s), licensure needed, brief description, original data source, date accessed/created, methodologies for data collection/manipulation, temporal and spatial scale of data, data attribute descriptions, and units. Metadata will be created while data is sourced and collected and updated as necessary through the project when new data is added. 
All metadata associated with code will be generated and documented in a separate document within the Github folder associated with all code and analysis done for the research. Metadata will include author(s), purpose, packages used, description of steps for analysis, and anticipated output including type and location of output file. Metadata will be created during coding and analysis to best encompass processes. 

https://www.fs.usda.gov/rds/archive/products/RDS-2019-0014-2/_metadata_RDS-2019-0014-2.html

The above is an example of using EML standards to generate metadata for a longitudinal study on goshawks in Arizona, including nesting attempts and outcomes from breeding pairs of goshawks. This data set is very similar to the tabular data I am using and currently collecting and the metadata generated is an excellent example of the EML standards that I will be using to document my data. The metadata the authors produced is available in human and machine-readable formats. It also contains all the pertinent information on purpose, data collection methodologies, data sources, spatial and temporal scale of data collection, and variable descriptions that will be necessary for documentation in my metadata. 

# Storage and Security
All nest outcome data is collected under a U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service grant which must follow federal government regulations and allow for public access to data sets. Location data supporting my research are sensitive and not available publicly as directed by state law (ORS 496.182). Research contains data of a protected species listed that has a history of harm and known demand for illegal harassment and contains sites used for sensitive or vulnerable life stages. Location data may be aggregated to protect specific locations that may cause harm to breeding or nesting eagles and included in the publicly available dataset. Portions of my data set are taken from other publicly available data sources and altered for my data analysis, therefore they are not protected or restricted. There are no technical reasons that data cannot be shared via a public repository.

# Access and Data Sharing
All nest outcome data from my project will be publicly available without restrictions or permissions to access. The location data may be shared with the federal government, tribal governments, a public utility or an accredited university by contacting Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife. There will be no license attached to any of the data sets created in my project and it will not contain any restrictions for the reuse, redistribution or creation of derivatives. Data will be made available at publication of the research. All publicly available data and metadata from the project will be accessed via Dryad repository. A link to the repository with a digital object identifier will be published in all reports, papers and articles derived from the analysis. Data will be made available in downloadable CSV files, as well as shapefile and KML files for all location-based data. All code used for analysis will be made available as R and txt files.

# Archiving and Preservation
All publicly available data will be preserved and archived in the Dryad repository indefinitely. This includes all CSV files, shapefiles, and code included to analyze data. There will be open access to archived data in the Dryad repository via the DOI assigned at publication. All location data will be preserved indefinitely in internal ODFW database and accessed via permissions from department database manager. Data collection efforts are also done in collaboration with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and will be archived on the internal ServCat database system, with access via data.gov.
